Title: ESP8266
Date: 2018-09-30 12:00
Modified: 2018-09-30 12:00
Category: Programming, DIY
Tags: programming, diy
Slug: esp8266
Authors: Jackson Baker
Summary: Rolling your own ESP8266

## Where to get the parts
The ESP8266 chip is a low-cost wifi enabled chip with Microcontroller features. In this post I'll walk you through the process of getting a bare chip up and running. If you're looking for simple experimentation there are some pre-built boards that will handle all of the setup for you like the [Adafruit Huzzah board] (https://www.adafruit.com/product/2471). I opted for buying a [breakout board] (https://www.addicore.com/ESP-12-adapter-p/ad248.htm) and the [ESP8266-12E/F] (https://www.addicore.com/ESP8266-ESP-12F-p/ad483.htm). This allows me to learn as much as possible about the chip, and keeps the cost at about half of the pre-built boards. 

## How to hook everything up for programming
First you'll need to solder the chip to the breakout board. This is simple if you've had soldering experience. The one tip that I would give is to tape the chip down to the board as it has a tendency to slip. Then once you've tacked a couple of the pins to the board you can removed the tape <INSERT PHOTO>.

The first hurdle that I ran into is that the breakout board is exactly as wide as a standard breadboard, so it helps to have two that you can stack side-by-side to make room for additional wires. Once you've got that plugged in we can start making the appropriate connections. 

1) Connect power!
I've hooked up a breadboard powersupply to mine, but any 3.3v power supply will do. DO NOT USE 5v! It will fry the chip. 

Connect VCC to the GND power rail.
Connect GND to the VCC power rail. 

2) Configure for flashing! 

Connect GPIO0 to GND (Only when flashing a program to the board)
Connect GPIO15 to VCC
Connect CH_PC (Sometimes labeled EN) to VCC (Required to 'enable' the board')

3) Connect the USB to FTDI chip

Connect GND on the FTDI to the GND power rail.
Connect RX on the FTDI to TX on the ESP8266
Connect TX on the FTDI to RX on the ESP8266

<INSERT DIAGRAM HERE>

Now that we've got everything hooked up connect the FTDI to your computer and fire up the power!


## Programming with Arduino
First you'll need to get the Arduino IDE configured appropriately. Sparkfun has a great tutorial written up about this [here] (https://learn.sparkfun.com/tutorials/esp8266-thing-hookup-guide/installing-the-esp8266-arduino-addon)

Once you've gotten those steps completed you can start using the Arduino IDE to program the ESP8266. 

I uploaded the "Blink" sketch to my board to test things out. On my board I had to set the led pin to pin 2 in order to get the blink code to work. It may vary depending on the board that you've purchased, but it is usually pin 1 or 2.

Remember that you'll need to connect GPIO0 to GND whenever flashing code to the board. Once the code is flashed it will automatically start running. If the power cycles and GPIO0 is still connected to GND then it will restart the chip in flash mode.

I've found that this board can be a little finicky. Generally if there are any issues they can be solved by a quick power cycle.


The Arduino IDE is a good programming environment, but for me the networking aspect was lacking. I wanted to experiment with something a little more powerful. For that I went through the process of flashing Micropython to the board. 

## Flashing Micropython

[link text] Up next: Compiling your own Micropython
